Cyber security Journal
Table of content
1. Commands List
2.Network 
Commands list
`while true; do`
 -Purpose: repeat a certain commands
 -Usage: “while true; do” for repeating a command, “while true; do” for repeating a answer until it find the correct answer.
 -Notes: Essential to repeat a commands
`zenity` 
 -Purpose: to make a pop-up text
 -Usage: “zenity -error” for creating an error pop-up text, “zenity -info” for creating an info pop up text
 -Notes: Essential to make a pop-up text
`nano`
 -Purpose: use to make and edit a txt document
 -Usage: “nano” for making and editing txt document
 -Notes: Basically, use to create and edit txt document
`ls`
 -Purpose: Lists the contents of a directory.
 -Usage: `ls` for basic listing, `ls -l` for detailed listing, `ls -a` to include hidden files.
 -Notes: Essential for quickly viewing what's in the current directory.
`cd`
 -Purpose: Changes the current directory.
 -Usage: `cd [directory path] ` to move to a specific directory, `cd ...` to move up one directory level, `cd` or `cd ~` to return to the home directory.
 -Notes: Most used for navigating through the filesystem.
`pwd`
 -Purpose: Prints the current directory path.
 -Usage: `pwd` to display the full path of the current directory.
 -Notes: Useful for confirming your current location in the filesystem.
`mkdir`
 -Purpose: Creates a new directory.
 -Usage: `mkdir [directory name] ` to create a new directory in the current location.
 -Notes: Handy for organizing files into new folders.
`rmdir`
 -Purpose: Removes a directory.
 -Usage: `rmdir [directory name] ` to delete an empty directory.
 -Notes: Used for cleaning up and removing unused directories. Note that the directory must be empty.
`dir`
 -Purpose: to check a directory
 -Usage: `dir [directory name] ` to check a directory.
 -Notes: Used for checking any directories.
`chmod`
 -Purpose: to give a permission
 -Usage: `chmod +x` adds execute permission, `chmod -x`
removes execute permission, `chmod u` stands for the user/owner of the file, `chmod g` stands for the group associated with the file, `chmod o` stands for others, `chmod a` stands for all `chmod u+x` adds execute permission for the user/owner only, `chmod go-x` removes execute permission for the group and others.
 -Notes: These are some of the permission commands
`bash ./loop.sh`
 -Purpose: to run a commands from sublime text.
 -Usage: run a commands from sumblime text
 -Notes: just to run a complex command from sumblime text
`rename-item a b`
 -Purpose: to rename a file or a folder
 -Usage: rename a file or a folder
 -Notes: a is the old file or folder name and b is were you type the new name
`clear`
 -Purpose: just to clear your work if it messing
 -Usage: clearing messing work
 -Notes: Use wisely
`ifconfig`
 -Purpose: to assign an address to a network interface and to configure or display the current network interface configuration information.
 -Notes: it for assign and configure the network interface
`traceroute`

Networking
`Gateway`
  -A gateway is an input or an output of the connection to the network
`IP address`
  -This is a numerical label assigned to each device connected to a computer network.
`Subnet Masks`
  -This helps a computer or device figure out which part of an IP address is used for the network and which part is used for devices within that network
`DNS (Domain Name System)`
  -This is a phonebook for the internet.
`Network Switch`
  -This is a device used in computer networks to connect multiple devices within a local area network
`Network router`
  -This is a device that connects different networks together, such as your local home network and the internet.
`Access points`
  -This is a device that allows wireless devices to connect to a wired network using Wi-Fi.
`MAC address`
  -This is a unique identifier assigned to a network interface controller (NIC) for use as a network address in communications within a network segment.
`Ports in network addressing`
  -Ports allow multiple services or applications to run on a single device while distinguishing between them.
`WAN (Wide Area Network.)`
  -It is a type of computer network that covers a broad area, such as a city, country, or even spans across continents.
`LAN (Local Area Network.)`
  -This is a network of connected computers, devices, and resources within a relatively small geographic area, such as a home, office, or campus.
`PAN (Personal Area Network.)`
  -This is a small network for personal devices, typically within the immediate reach of an individual.
`MAN (Metropolitan Area Network.)`
  -This is a type of network that covers a larger geographical area than a local area network (LAN) but is smaller than a wide area network (WAN).
`VPN (Virtual Private Network.)`
  -It helps protect your online privacy by creating a safe connection between your device and the internet, especially when you're using public Wi-Fi networks.

Bash scripting  
  What is bash scripting
    Bash scripting is a way to automate tasks on a Unix-like operating system, such as Linux or macOS, using a programming language called Bash
  How to write a simple bash script
    Choose a text editor: Select a text editor, such as vi, vim, or kwrite, to create and edit your script file. Make sure to save the file with a .sh extension, for example, myscript.sh.
    Add the shebang: Begin your script with the shebang line, which specifies the interpreter that should be used to run the script. In this case, it’s #!/bin/bash. This line tells the system to use the Bash shell to execute the script.
    Write your script: Use Bash syntax to write your script. For example, you can use variables, conditional statements, loops, and commands to perform tasks.
    Use variables: Declare and assign values to variables using the = operator. For example: MY_VAR="Hello World".
    Use commands: Execute system commands using the command syntax. For example: echo "Hello World" or ls -l.
    Use control structures: Use if statements, for loops, and while loops to control the flow of your script.
    Make the script executable: Use the chmod command to set the execute permission on your script file. For example: chmod +x myscript.sh.
    Run the script: Execute your script by running it with the ./ prefix, followed by the script name. For example: ./myscript.sh.
  The follow bash key commands
    Navigation
    Ctrl+U: Discard the current command without executing it and move to a new line, saving it in a buffer for later recall with Ctrl+Y.
    Ctrl+X, Ctrl+E: Open the current command line in a visual editor (e.g., vi or vim) for editing.
    Ctrl+Left/Right Arrow: Move the cursor one word left/right.
    Ctrl+Shift+V: Paste from the clipboard.
    Ctrl+Y: Paste from the cut buffer.
    Process Management
    ps: Display information about current running processes.
    kill: Send a signal to a process (e.g., -9 for SIGKILL).
    killall: Send a signal to all processes matching a name.
    File Management
    du: Display disk usage (options: -h for human-readable format, -s for total size only).
    Editing
    cat: Display file contents (option: -n for numbered lines).
    Ownership and Permissions
    chown: Change file ownership (option: -R for recursive mode).
    Searching
    grep: Search for patterns in files (options: -i for case-insensitive search, -r for recursive search, -l for displaying only file names).
    History
    history: Manage command history (options: -c for clearing history, -w for writing history to file).
    Miscellaneous
    echo: Display text or variables (useful for generating output messages, displaying variable values, or in Bash scripts).
    Customization
    Aliases: Create custom commands (abbreviations) for frequently used commands or sequences.
    Initialization
    bind -P: List all shortcuts in the current Bash shell (persistent across sessions).
    Scripting
    & (ampersand): Run a command in the background.
System Monitoring
   System monitoring is a surveillance process that tracks measurable events and/or outputs of a system, often referred to as a reference model that specifies a reasonable good behavior.
Based on the provided search results, here are some system monitoring commands:

Health Checks
  show system uptime: Checks the amount of time the system has been operational since the last downtime.
  show logs: Views both active and inactive system event logs.
  show crash list: Checks the crash log to determine if any software tasks have restarted on the system.
  show alarm outstanding all and show alarm all: Displays current alarms to verify system status.
  show alarm statistics: Views system alarm statistics to gain an overall picture of the system’s alarm history.
Interactive Top Commands
  Enter and Space: Immediately refreshes the display.
  k key: Kills a process.
  h command: Displays help.
System Monitoring Tools
  top: A traditional system monitoring command that displays running processes, CPU usage, memory usage, and more.
  atop: Similar to top, but with additional features such as disk usage and network activity monitoring.
  htop: An interactive system monitor that supports scrolling and mouse interaction.
  glances: A system monitoring tool that displays sensors data, disk usage, network activity, and more.
  bashtop: A system monitoring tool that provides a curses-based interface for monitoring system resources.
Other Commands
  ps ax: Lists all processes currently running on the system, including processes owned by other users.
  iostat: Reports CPU and disk I/O statistics, including idle percentage.
  mytop: Monitors MySQL performance and keeps refreshing itself like the watch command.
Additional Tools
  SysGauge: A system and performance monitoring utility that allows monitoring of CPU usage, memory usage, disk space usage, disk activities, and network activities.
  Netdata: A distributed real-time, health monitoring platform for systems, hardware, containers, and applications.
Commands
Journalctl is a command-line utility in Linux systems, part of the systemd suite, used to view and manipulate system logs collected by the systemd-journald service. 
Here are some key features and uses of journalctl:
    Log viewing: journalctl displays logs in a format similar to traditional syslog, with each line showing the date, hostname, process name, and log message.
    Paging and filtering: Use various options (e.g., -u, -b, -k, -p) to filter logs by:
        Service (e.g., journalctl -u ssh for SSH logs)
        Boot session (e.g., journalctl -b 0 for current boot session)
        Log level (e.g., journalctl -p 4..6 for warning, notice, and info logs)
        Time range (e.g., journalctl --since "2022-02-28 00:00:00" --until "2022-02-28 23:00:00" for logs within a specific time interval)
    Navigation and search: journalctl’s output is piped to the less command, allowing you to navigate and search logs using standard less key bindings.
    Log cleaning and management: journalctl offers options to:
        Remove archived journal files based on size (--vacuum-size), time (--vacuum-time), or number of files (--vacuum-files)
        Display disk usage information (journalctl --disk-usage)
    Integration with systemd: journalctl is tightly integrated with systemd, allowing you to monitor and analyze logs from various systemd services and components.

Example of Journalctl
  isplaying all logs: journalctl
  (This will display all logs from all services and programs, including system logs, kernel logs, and application logs.)

  Filtering by service: journalctl -u apache.service
  (This will display only logs related to the Apache web server service.)

  Filtering by date and time: journalctl --since "2022-02-28 00:00:00" --until "2022-02-28 23:00:00"
  (This will display logs generated between 00:00 and 23:00 on February 28, 2022.)

  Filtering by priority: journalctl -p err
  (This will display only logs with a priority of “error” or higher.)

  Following new log entries: journalctl -f
  (This will display new log entries as they are added, similar to the tail command.)

  Displaying kernel logs: journalctl -k
  (This will display only kernel logs, including system boot messages and kernel errors.)

  Displaying logs from a specific boot: journalctl -b -1
  (This will display logs from the most recent system boot.)

  Filtering by message content: journalctl -g "error"
  (This will display logs containing the string “error” in the message text.)

  Displaying logs in JSON format:journalctl -o json-pretty
  (This will display logs in a JSON format with indentation and formatting.)

  Vacuuming journal logs: journalctl --vacuum-size=1G
  (This will remove older logs to free up disk space, keeping only the most recent 1GB of logs.)

  These are just a few examples of the many ways you can use journalctl to filter and display system logs.   

Step-by-step guide on how to monitor system resource usage and check logs for potential issues.
Step 1: Access Resource Monitor
  On Windows:
    Press the Windows key + R to open the Run dialog box.
    Type resmon and press Enter to launch Resource Monitor.
  On Linux:
    Open a terminal and use the command top or htop to monitor system resource usage.
    Alternatively, use glances or sysdig for a more detailed view.
Step 2: Analyze Resource Usage
  In Resource Monitor (Windows):
    Observe the real-time usage of CPU, memory, disk, and network resources.
    Identify any processes or applications consuming excessive resources.
  In top or htop (Linux):
    Sort processes by CPU or memory usage to identify resource-intensive applications.
    Use filters to focus on specific processes or resources.
Step 3: Check Event Logs
  On Windows:
    Open Event Viewer (Press Windows key + R, type eventvwr, and press Enter).
    Navigate to the “Windows Logs” section.
    Filter events by date, severity, or category to identify potential issues.
  On Linux:
  Use the journalctl command to view system logs.
  Filter logs by date, priority, or message to identify potential issues.
Step 4: Review Log Data
  In Event Viewer (Windows):
    Review log entries for errors, warnings, and informational messages.
    Look for patterns or recurring issues.
  In journalctl (Linux):
    Review log entries for errors, warnings, and informational messages.
    Use the --since and --until options to filter logs by date and time.
Step 5: Troubleshoot and Optimize
  Based on your analysis, identify potential issues and troubleshoot accordingly.
  Optimize system resource usage by:
    Closing unnecessary applications or background processes.
    Adjusting system settings or configurations.
    Upgrading hardware or software as needed.
Step 6 :repeat
  Regularly monitor system resource usage and log data to catch potential issues early.
  Use filters and sorting options to focus on specific areas of interest.
  Consult system documentation and online resources for specific guidance on monitoring and troubleshooting.

System security
  Defense in Depth (DiD): Protect the system by applying several layers of security. This principle is similar to peeling an onion, where each layer provides an additional barrier against attacks. A single broken defense can be compensated for by the next layer.
  Authentication: Verify that users are who they claim to be. Implement authentication features such as password systems to ensure proper access control.
  Authorization: Define what an authenticated user or entity can do. Use authorization to restrict access to resources and ensure that users only have access to what they need.  
  Availability: Ensure that systems and resources are consistently accessible and operational to support business processes and meet user needs.
  Confidentiality: Protect sensitive information from unauthorized access, disclosure, or use.
  Non-repudiation: Ensure that actions taken by users or systems cannot be denied or disputed.
  Integrity: Maintain the accuracy, completeness, and consistency of data and systems.
  Risk Analysis: Identify potential threats and vulnerabilities to determine the likelihood and impact of security incidents. This helps to prioritize security measures and allocate resources effectively.
File Permissions
  it to control access to files and directories, ensuring that only authorized users and processes can read, write, execute, or modify them.
Usage of chmod, chown, Ls -l
  Chmod: this is a command in Linux used to change the access permissions of a file or directory. It allows you to modify the read (r), write (w), and execute (x) permissions for the owner, group, and others.
  Chown: this  is a command in Linux used to change the owner or group of a file or directory.
  ls -l: is a command in Linux used to display a long listing of files and directories, including their permissions, ownership, and timestamps.
Step in creating a file with chmood +X
  Open a terminal and navigate to the directory where the file is located using the cd command.
  Identify the file you want to make executable. For example, let’s say the file is named myscript.sh.
  Use the chmod command with the +x option to set the execute permission. The syntax is:
User Management
  Adduser

Octal Notion
  Octal Notion is a number system with a base of 8, using the digits 0 to 7 to represent numbers.
  It is commonly used in computing, particularly in file permissions and system configuration files.
  Conversion
    Binary numbers can be converted to octal numbers by grouping them into sets of three bits and replacing each set with the corresponding octal digit (0-7).
    Octal numbers can be converted to decimal numbers by multiplying each digit by the corresponding power of 8 (8^0, 8^1, 8^2, …).
    Octal numbers can be converted to hexadecimal numbers by converting each octal digit to its hexadecimal equivalent (0-7 becomes 0-7).
  File Permissions
    In Unix-like systems, file permissions are represented using octal notation. Each digit in the three-digit code represents the permissions for the owner, group, and others, respectively.
    The permissions are:
      4: read
      2: write
      1: execute
      0: none
      Example: 644 means: + Owner has read and write permissions (6) + Group has read permission (4) + Others have no permissions (0)

  Advantages
    Octal notation is more compact and easier to read than binary notation.
    It is simpler to use than hexadecimal notation for file permissions and system configuration.
  Disadvantages
    Octal notation is less widely used than decimal, hexadecimal, and binary notations. * It can be less intuitive for users unfamiliar with the system.
    



Git commands
•Initialize Repository:bash -[git init]
•Configure Git:bash -[git config --global user.name "Your Name"]
bash -[git config --global user.email "youremail@example.com"]
•Check Status:bash -[git status]
•Stage Files:bash -[git add filename]
bash -[git add .]
•Commit Changes:bash -[git commit -m "message"]
•View Log:bash -[git log]
•Create and Switch Branch:bash -[git checkout -b branch-name]
•Switch Branch:bash -[git checkout branch-name]
•Merge Branches:bash -[git merge branch-name]
•Delete Branch:bash -[git branch -d branch-name]
•Undo Changes in Working Directory:
 oUsing git restore(newer versions):bash -[git restore filename]
 oUsing git checkout(older versions):bash -[git checkout --filename]
•Remove Cached File:bash -[git rm --cached filename]
•Set Alias:bash -[git config --global alias.alias-name command]
•Tag a Commit:bash -[git tag -a v1.0 -m "message"]
•Reset Commits:bash -[git reset --soft HEAD~1]
bash -[git reset --hard HEAD~1]

Random codes 
traceroute 
tracepath 
ping 
netstat 
ss
dig 
nslookup 
route  
host 
arp 
iwconfig 
hostname 
curl or wget 
mtr 
whois 
ifplugstatus 
iftop 
tcpdum
Notes
